110
St. Ignatius ad Ephes. xix. init. Κα λαθεν τον ρχοντα το ανο τουτο παρθενα Μαρα, κα τοκετς ατ, μοω κα
θνατο το Κυρου τρα μυστρια κραυγ τινα ν συχ Θεο πρχθη. “Now the virginity of Mary, and her delivery, was
kept in secret from the prince of this world, as was also the Lord’s death; three most notable mysteries, yet done
in Secret of God.” [See Ante-Nicene Fathers, Vol. I., p. 57. The Greek given in this note is from the “briefer”
form of the Ignatian Epistles. But the “longer” form differs very little, and the Syriac version, brief as it is, contains
this sentence.—R.] And Origen, 6th Homily on St. Luke, says, “It has been well written in one of the epistles of
a certain martyr, I mean Ignatius, the next Bishop of Antioch after the blessed Peter, him who fought with wild
beasts in the persecution at Rome, ‘Now the virginity of Mary was kept in secret from the prince of this world.’
It was concealed because of Joseph, because of her espousals, because she was supposed to have a husband. For,
had she had no spouse or supposed husband, it could not have been concealed from the prince of this world.
For presently the thought would have silently occurred to the evil one, ‘How is she with child, who knoweth not
a man? This conception must be divine, it must be something higher than human nature.’ On the contrary, our
Saviour had purposed that the devil should be ignorant of his Œconomy and Incarnation: for which cause He
both in His birth concealed the same, and commanded His disciples afterwards that they should not make Him
known. Also when tempted by the devil in person, He no where owned Himself Son of God.” Origen then quotes
1 Cor. ii. 6–8, to the same effect. And in answer to the objection, How the devils which were from time to time
cast out knew Him to be the Son of God, he suggests that it might be owing to their inferiority in malice and
mischief: according to the rule among men, that the worse they are, the less they can know of Christ. [The
Homilies of Origen are not included in the Ante-Nicene Fathers.] See also a supposed Homily of St. Basil’s, De
Christi generatione, Ed. Ben. ii. 598, c.; and St. Jerome on St. Matt. i. 18.
111
[θαυμαστν τι κα μγα οκονομνκακουργοντε .
112
φανερ ναισχντουν.
113
[Κα γρ.]
114
[ἐκενην.]
115
Luke ii. 48.
116
Matt. i. 3.
117
[More accurately, “But why is this? one may say.”—R.]
118
[τν Αβραμ νω κα κτω παρφερον.]
119
Gen. xxxviii. 27.
120
Our marginal translation is, “Wherefore hast thou made this breach against thee?” Gen. xxxviii. 29. [R.V.
text: “Wherefore hast thou made a breach for thyself,” with the margin: “Or, How hast thou made a breach ! A
breach be upon thee!” The LXX. rendering, which Chrysostom cites, misses the suggestion of the original
Hebrew.—R.]
121
τ ανιγμα.
122
[τ προηγοπα το παιδου. The terms seem to be chosen to suggest that the name of the child came from the
greeting given it by the midwife.—R.]
123
i.e., The Jewish and the Christian. Compare the 62d Homily on Genesis, t. i. 478, ed. Sav. “Zara being interpreted, is ‘the East.’ And that these things did not take place at random, but were a type of what was to come,
the facts themselves indicate. For that which happened was not in the order of nature. For how was it possible,
when the hand had been bound with the scarlet thread, for it to be again drawn back to afford passage to him
who came after had there not been some divine power which before ordained these things, and as in a kind of
shadow drew out this figure; that at first and from the beginning Zara (that is the East, which is the type of the
Church) began to increase, and after it had made a little progress and then retired, the observance of the Law,
represented by Phares, came in: and after prevailing a long time, on a second advance of Zara, who had before
retired, made room on the contrary for the Church; I mean, the whole Jewish polity did so.” “Perhaps, however,
it is necessary now to state the matter more briefly and clearly. There was a beginning, like the putting forth of
Zara’s hand, in Abel, Enoch, Noah, Melchisedek, Abraham, making extreme account of what might please God.
Afterwards, when they had grown into a multitude, and had heaped on themselves heavy burdens of sin, and
needed the benefit of some slight consolation, the Law was given as a kind of shadow, not as taking away sins,
but as declaring and making them manifest: that as imperfect children living on milk they might be capable of
attaining full age. But when even thus they failed of profiting, yea, kept mingling themselves up again with their
sins, all the while that the Law was pointing out the greatness of the same, He came who is our common Lord,
and freely bestowed on mankind this present spiritual polity, full of all virtue, whereof Zara was to stand as a
type. For this cause the evangelist also both mentioned Thamar and her children, saying, ‘Judas begat Pharez
and Zarah of Thamar.’” Compare also St. Cyr. of Alex. 6 lib. in Gen. t. i. 201, ed. Aubert; Theod. in Gen. qu. 96;
St. Aug. in Ps. 61, t. iv. 442, D. [A good specimen of the allegorizing exegesis which even such an expositor as
Chrysostom could indulge in. The detailed account of the birth of Pharez is justified by the importance attached
to the position of first-born.—R.]
124
Ps. lxxx. 12.
125
Is. v. 2, where the marginal translation is, He made a wall about it: the word hedge occurs verse 5. [R.V.,
verse 2. “He made a trench about it,” with margin, “Or, digged it.” In the LXX. φραγμν occurs, however.—R.]
126
Eph. ii. 14, where this word is translated “partition.” [Retained in the R.V.]
127
[The entire paragraph is based on the LXX. rendering, which by introducing φραγμς suggests an idea
foreign to the original Hebrew.—R.]
128
Hos. i. 2; Jer. iii.; Ezek. xxiii. 4, 5, 11.
129
[The Greek text has simply ττε, a term that is usually paraphrased by the translator.—R.]
130
Ps. xlv. 11, 12.
131
[That is, no proud thought.—R.]
132
[“Thyself” is supplied by the translator.—R.]
133
Ezek. xxxvi. 22.
19
Demand not therefore a reward that thou mayest receive a reward. Confess thyself to be
saved by grace, that He may profess Himself a debtor to thee; and not for thy good works
only, but also for such rightness of mind. For when we do good works, we have Him debtor
for our good works only; but when we do not so much as think we have done any good
134
το συλλγοντο.
135
Song of the Three Children, Vers. 6, 8, 4.
136
ὁμολογεν—ὁμολογοντα. There seems an allusion to the two meanings of confiteor and the kindred words.
137
ὁμολογεν—ὁμολογοντα. There seems an allusion to the two meanings of confiteor and the kindred words.
138
Luke xvii. 10.
139
Matt. viii. 8.
140
1 Cor. xv. 9.
141
Mark i. 7; Luke iii. 16; John i. 27, iii. 29.
142
Alluding to Matthew iii. 14, 15; and to the custom of the ancient Church of adding imposition of hands
for the gift of the strengthening Spirit immediately on baptism, if the bishop were present. See Bingham, xii. 1,
1, and the writers quoted by him, especially Tertullian, de Bapt. 7. “As soon as we are come out of the water, we
are anointed with the consecrated oil…Then we receive imposition of hands, summoning and inviting the Holy
Spirit in the way of solemn benediction.” [Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol. iii. p. 672. The second sentence is the beginning of chap. 8 in Tertullian’s treatise.—R.]
143
Luke v. 8.
144
[φιλοσοφα.]
145
[ψυχν.]
146
[τ φιλοσοφια.]
147
ἐπεμβανοντα ατο τ καιρ.
148
2 Sam. xvi. 10.
149
[The words “of God” are supplied by the translator.—R.]
150
Or, “Carry back the ark of God into the city, and put it in its place: if I shall find favor in the eyes of the
Lord,” &c. Benedict. and Savil. 2 Sam. xv. 25, 26.
151
ἐπιεκεαν.
152
Acts. xiii. 22; 1 Sam. xiii. 14.
153
Matt. xi. 29.
