508
Matt. iii. 14.
509
John xiii. 7, 8.
510
Matt. iii. 15. [R.V., “Suffer it (or me) now, for thus it becometh,” etc.—R.]
511
Matt. iii. 15, 16. [R.V., “from the water,” and “coming” for “lighting.”—R.]
512
Is. v. 4. [Chrysostom varies from the LXX., introducing με δει, to strengthen his argument.—R.]
513
Matt. iii. 16.
514
Acts ii. 2.
515
1 Cor. xiv. 22.
516
Gal. vi. 1. [The immediate reference in Gal. vi. 1 is not to the Holy Spirit, yet there is a suggestion of the
influence of the Holy Spirit.—R.]
517
Gen. viii.
518
2 Cor. ix. 15.
519
i.e., the Macedonians, who were censured at Constantinople, A.D. 381.
521
[παραδιδναι; “hand down” would express the sense more clearly.—R.]
522
[The sentence in the Greek is not negative but affirmative: “Then assuredly” both these events occurred.—R.]
523
Gen. iii. 19.
524
Gen. iv. 12. [The LXX. has γ in both passages. The verbal suggestion of the original may be retained by
rendering: “Earth thou art, and unto earth thou shalt return,” and thou “tillest the earth.”—R.]
525
[Literally, “that we shall hear.”—R.]
526
Matt. xxv. 30.
76
punishment. Elias once opened and shut Heaven, but that was to bring down rain, and restrain it; whereas to thee the heaven is not so opened, but in order for thee to ascend thither;
and what is yet more, not to ascend only, but to lead up others also, if thou wilt; such great
confidence and power hath He bestowed on thee in all that is His.
5. Forasmuch then as our house is there, there let us store up all, and leave nothing here,
lest we lose it. For here, though thou put a lock on it, and doors, and bars, and set thousands
of servants to watch it; though thou get the better of all the crafty ones, though thou escape
the eyes of the envious, the worms, the wasting that comes of time; which is impossible;—death at any rate thou wilt never escape, but wilt be deprived of all those things
in one moment of time; and not deprived of them only, but wilt have to transfer them into
the hands often of thy very enemies. Whereas if thou wouldest transfer them into that house,
thou wilt be far above all. For there is no need to apply either key, or doors, or bars; such is
the virtue527of that city, so inviolable is this place, and by nature inaccessible to corruption
and all wickedness.
How then is it not of the utmost folly, where destruction and waste is the lot of all that
is stored, there to heap up all, but where things abide untouched and increase, there not to
lay up even the least portion; and this, when we are to live there forever? For this cause the
very heathens528disbelieve the things that we say, since our doings, not our sayings, are the
demonstration which they are willing to receive from us; and when they see us building
ourselves fine houses, and laying out gardens and baths, and buying fields, they are not
willing to believe that we are preparing for another sort of residence away from our city.
“For if this were so,” say they, “they would turn to money all they have here, and lay
them up beforehand there;” and this they divine from the things that are done in this world.
For so we see those who are very rich getting themselves houses and fields and all the rest,
chiefly in those cities in which they are to stay. But we do the contrary; and with all earnest
zeal we get possession of the earth, which we are soon after to leave; giving up not money
only, but even our very blood for a few acres and tenements: while for the purchase of
Heaven we do not endure to give even what is beyond our wants, and this though we are to
purchase it at a small price, and to possess it forever, provided we had once purchased it.
Therefore I say we shall suffer the utmost punishment, departing thither naked and
poor; or rather it will not be for our own poverty that we shall undergo these irremediable
calamities, but also for our making others to be such as ourselves. For when heathens see
527
[δναμι ]
528
[῞Ελληνε.] “Greeks.” But the ecclesiastical use is correctly given in the translation. In the New Testament,
the term was equivalent to “Gentiles,” as opposed to Jews; but was afterwards applied to heathen as opposed to
Christians. See Sophocles Greek Lexicon of the Roman and Byzantine periods, sub voce.—R.]
529
[ἐπισφγγωμεν, The verb means “to bind tight,” and is variously applied.—R.]
